Everything is a narrative. Really,
anything in society is some version of a
narrative. When predicate understanding
of what is actually happening is made
conscious and it's communicated in a way
that doesn't quite name the thing was
able to metaphorically describe it, it
can be extremely inspiring because it
simply it seems that these three
elements of the external, the internal
and the philosophical combined unlock
something that that moves people very
deeply.
I'd love to ask a bunch of questions
about work that you've done with
companies and helping the founders of
those companies distill down the
narrative of them, their business, their
product in a way that's transformative
for them. I know you've done this with
startups. You've done this with massive
companies we probably can't name. Um
it's it's a thing you've done over and
over again. Can you describe this thing
that you've done with a number of people
in as much detail like crazy detail as
you're willing to? Like the the method
that has started to emerge from you this
curiosity you have about certain
builders and what you do with that
curiosity and how you help them. When
you talk to someone about this like
self-nowledge exploration or something,
is the thing after the underlying reason
that they themselves may not know yet
why they're doing what they're doing? Is
that is does it boil down to that?
>> The way I I I think of it is the story
works in three layers. One, there's the
external mechanics of how the character
interacts in the world and you can
substitute character for product. That's
a requirement and and in the case of
technology, it's technical. You got to
have something that people works, right?
I mean there's there's no way around
that. And then there are two more layers
which is a um a subjective layer of
why is this series of events important
to me and what does it mean to me
personally? And then there is a
philosophical layer and on a
philosophical level it it's probably
where you try to find out and you have
to steel man this and it's very easy to
straw man it but you got to steel man
it. how you believe the world works
today and what people believe makes a
good world cuz everyone most of the time
believes they're doing what is the right
thing and what it needs to be done the
way it's done for a reason and they're
mostly not wrong. Right? So, so there's
a almost intractable
philosophical beliefs of how the world
works and why that's a good thing and
then you juxtapose that with your own
personal philosophy of the dominant
worldview is actually wrong and you
supplant that with your own personal
philosophy and ideally you do this you
know there's four or five points and and
you do it on a uh on a direct
reputational basis. So each one you say
everyone believes this I believe that
when this is steelman is really helpful
and then you do the same. So this is on
a sort of global um level about how how
the world and when we talk about world
it's probably specific to whatever it is
you're building or or running um and
then you do that for the personal as
well.
So you can do it for a customer, you can
do it for a person you're selling to.
How do they believe things should be
done and you juxapose that with what you
think should be done?
>> I I want to just like drill on these
three layers of the story
>> and try to turn it into a device that
someone could like take away from this
and try to apply to themselves. If I'm
listening uh and I'm curious about
>> I'll just keep it grounded in business
like the story of my business at these
three levels. Is there a good question
that I could ask like prompt myself with
to get at the external, the emotional
and the philosophical? Can you think of
a question one question for each?
>> The external would be what are we doing,
right? What are we making? What are we
selling? What are we buying? Whatever it
may be as a the core function of the
company. The the philosophical is the is
the why on a more abstract level. So you
believe in certain certain ideals a
certain way you believe that the world
should be um on an abstract level. The
emotional is a personal why in the
founders case it's very often why they
are doing it right so there is an origin
story around that they will recruit
people consciously or unconsciously that
is in the similar vein and you can get
very theoretical about this if you if
you want to right I think for the
majority of people it's a it's a visual
visceral personal experience that other
people can relate to if it's a large
organization why one does this on a
personal level and it's it's these three
things working in concert
>> picking up where the other leaves off
and sort of having a trifecta dance.
>> So, so maybe to rebuild it in the other
direction, the questions are something
like how should the world be in a in a
general sense
>> or how how do we believe or how do I
believe in a good life?
>> Yep. The second layer is why am I doing
this? Like what is it about my specific
story that maps back onto that? And the
third is what are we doing about it? And
if you tell the company's story in that
way, what does it galvanize that makes
it worth pursuing in the first place?
Because it seems like the thing that I
encounter over and over again is even
companies making something really great
don't know how to talk about themselves
for whatever reason. I'm curious why you
think that is like why companies
struggle with that and then why there's
such a payoff to doing the work to
figure it out.
>> I think sometimes it's because doing the
thing is so difficult and complex.
um that the idea of having to frame this
now on top of everything else in some
sort of philosophical way is
overwhelming and and doesn't even seem
necessary at times. Um, of course, it's
always present and people just are not
conscious of it. I think that's very
often the case that it's all there. It
just hasn't been unearthed yet. Um,
which is great fun because the second
you give people these these tools,
they're just frameworks to live within,
right? They're decision-m frameworks.
Everything is a narrative. Really
anything in society
is is some version of a narrative.
Right? When this is made conscious. So
when the predicate understanding of what
is actually happening is made conscious
and it's communicated in a way that
doesn't quite name the thing but has met
is able to metaphorically describe it.
It can be extremely inspiring.
Um because it simply it seems that these
three elements of the external, the
internal and the philosophical combined
unlock something that that moves people
very deeply. I was at Stanford when when
the turnaround for Apple sort of in its
second inning. I should not be using
baseball metaphors because I have no
idea what they are.
So it was but this was a man who had a
philosophy of of sort of a personal
worldview
and knew exactly what he was fighting
against at all times and then acted
according accordingly with unbelievable
discipline and courage and created
something that was a work of art in many
ways. Right? He literally wanted to make
business art and he kind of did. every
one of these instances is completely
unique obviously and but I think that is
what's possible. It also makes makes it
just more interesting in general, right?
I mean, it it's very it's very easy to
be conformist in some sense because you
know what's expected, but there's a lot
left on the table, too. Um, at the same
time, espousing a new narrative or
finding a predicated understanding um
just unlocks a ton, right? It doesn't
need to be this life-changing. Um,
sometimes they can be incremental and
just unlock a whole new world of of of
potential that is very easily
implemented. In many ways, stories are
very good at creating symbols which
represent some sort of transcendental
belief that people participate in in the
sense that everyone has an ultimate
concern, something that they're in
absolute ways concerned about. We won't
talk about it, but it can be many
different kinds of things. It can it can
be uh it can be money. It can be a
deity. It can it can be truth. To be
able to present
a an ultimate concern around around a
business organization that makes a makes
a product um of of some kind I think
fulfills personal life picture for the
people you're communicating it to. So it
just it feels more important. It feels
truer uh and it feels more meaningful
and worthwhile. We're going to talk a
lot about applying some of these
principles to the world of building
companies or making things. One of the
very first things I can remember you
teaching me is something to the effect
of uh everyone focuses on the new when
trying to tell you about their thing,
>> but that the right approach is actually
like maybe only 20% new and 80% familiar
or something like that. Can you say more
about this principle of storytelling or
of delivering a message or conveying
something to people that the the trap we
fall in of just trying to just focus on
the exciting new thing?
>> The the interesting thing about this
whole world is that there are no rules
to it, right? It's just sort of everyone
gleans and and tries to come up with
rules for themselves that sometimes that
seem to work more often than they don't
work, but there's no book on this
really. Um Raymond Loy the designer had
a similar rule right around 8020. This
is sort of the the most tolerable
element of new
um before it's rejected by the human
mind as incomprehensible with the idea
of originality and creativity. There's a
sort of tension even that of itself is a
story. There's this tension where where
especially now originality is highly
prized and and and there's sort of this
belief that only the very new is truly
novel with storytelling especially but I
even think maybe this is confirmation
bias but I even think in in business or
in innovation the new is is really just
the obvious uncovered
through systematic trial and error over
a certain period of time. So that by
striving to stay within the obvious and
trying to find a variation on the
obvious, I think you have a higher
chance at least in storytelling of of
discovering something novel that will
still feel
intelligible enough
to categorize in the world. Some people
have an ability to see something truly
new and immediately categorize it and
those people tend to be very successful
investors for instance. But generally
speaking, I think the the idea of
original is overrated and the great
filmmakers know this. For instance,
great novelists um know this that you
can begin with
something very familiar and make it feel
totally new incrementally.
>> Tell me about the uh the short film that
you like so much that's nothing more
than a camera panning back and forth. It
it was a project where simply there's a
camera installed in the room and the the
camera would move back and forth across
the room and each time uncover a little
bit more of the room and nothing else
happens. There's no payoff to it. But
the the suspense of seeing a little bit
more information about the room is
absolutely riveting. Even just this tiny
amount of new information being given
creates enormous suspense because
somehow we're good at anticipating.
We're really always anticipating. Each
new piece of information gets put into
some kind of puzzle. So by the end, the
suspense is unbearable.
>> If you think about the power of
communicating by starting with the
familiar and the known, how would you
encourage CEOs, companies, people
talking about their thing? Use that
truth. Like what is the method that
you've seen the best explain accepted
reality before trying to explain their
new thing? like is there a method that
comes out of this that you think is
useful to founders especially as the
group that I'm the most interested in?
>> I think the reason storytelling to me is
so effective is because you you
have you have a subjective point of view
that an individual can relate to because
it it's sort of imitating and processing
the the charact the character's point of
view. So it's subjective in that way. um
subjective access to to in storytelling
it would be a universal truth but that
can be only accessed subjectively.
>> Does that mean that uh in trying to
reach the mind of a customer let's say
the right thing or allocation of time
for the founder is to spend most of
their time understanding the natural
story of the customer as it currently
exists versus how it should be and then
build off of that.
>> Yeah,
>> I think that's exactly right. It's easy
to to forget that you're dealing with
human beings, right? Who have a human
experience at the same time as having a
professional experience. And and story
is really good at at seeing these two
layers at the same time. There's a
subjective experience that a human being
has and then there's the professional
experience on top of it. And I think you
want to combine these two uh and
understand you're dealing with human
beings first and foremost. And I think
the greatest founders and the greatest
builders understand this instinctively.
What did you learn running studios?
You've made or been a part of making so
many things, so many movies.
>> Yeah, I always ran this sort of midsize
places. I never ran a sort of a Warner
Brothers type place simply because I
thought they don't make the kinds of
movies I'm particularly good at or
interesting interested in. At the same
time, I it takes it's a very specific
skill set to run the big ones. So, I I
ran the mid-size ones. I think it has to
do with being able to communicate in
different worlds which is actually quite
difficult because you have to speak the
language of filmmakers who live in their
own in their own world and then you have
to speak the language of corporate
because their reporting requirements and
and business requirements and then you
you have to speak the the language of um
marketing and sales. You are a
communicator between worlds. uh and your
job is to understand the language of
film making and the language of business
and the language of marketing and run
interference so the thing can happen.
>> What uh could CEOs learn from filmmakers
or two groups that like lead a group of
people to make a thing? I've always been
have this weird obsession with
filmmakers. I don't know why. Maybe it's
the the fact that the thing they make
like hasn't it it ends like the project
ends and then it's on to the next. It's
not just this like continuous thing that
you have to constantly build. And that's
appealing to me in some way. You've
worked with some of the, you know,
amazing filmmakers and and seen, you
know, appreciated their art. What could
one learn from the other?
>> I come back to this
ability and willingness to take ultimate
responsibility,
right? Which is really not what most
people want to do at all. And for some
reason, especially filmmakers that have
a true vision of what it is they want to
be doing, which means they they're
birthing, right, this this project. and
then take ultimate responsibility from
beginning to end and then do it again
and then do it again each time risking,
you know, total failure staking their
entire being on this one next thing.
They're running these pretty big
temporary startups
um that get funding from the outside
world, right? They get distribution from
someone else, not themselves. So I think
it's it's the the courage and it's also
courage to espouse that particular
worldview and all the great filmmakers
have a very particular worldview. I
think it's extraordinary that this
exists at all in the world. Someone like
that exists who will do that even if it
fails and then is willing to do it
again. Some of the CEOs I've gotten to
know, they're also artists in some ways,
right? because this is this is difficult
stuff, you know, especially when you
have 100,000 employees. I mean, and
you're owning it, too. To answer the
question more precisely, I think it's
this the willingness and the courage to
espouse a specific kind of world view
that perhaps is a little bit counter but
sends in some tension to the dominant
worldview and own that. Anyways,
>> having been and worked with lots of CEOs
that have chosen this like ultimate
responsibility,
h how would you articulate the job of a
CEO? Like in your experience when you've
seen people do that job well or do it
poorly? What what what are the good ones
in some like basic sense doing really
well? society is communication and that
because of its complexity, communication
breaks down into buckets of of
specialty, but it it's in essence being
a master communicator of an almost
infinite amount of buckets and knowing
to context switch between them and
understanding the language games and
each one of these buckets plays, but
never forgetting the core principles
underneath all this. Some of it is
unspoken. the people I've observed as
especially as one person that I admire
enormously who's doing a massive
turnaround and he was been communicating
the same marching waters for two years
to this huge company and everyone around
him was in doubt and the results are
finally coming in and he's right and
he's sort of imposed he's willing
against all these obstacles but he was
able to do it because he could
communicate
exactly what he was doing almost in
these three layers to anyone but always
adjusting
never the philosophy, but always sort of
adjusting the emotional component to
whomever he was speaking to so that each
person could hear the point that needed
to be conveyed so they could be at peace
knowing that they done their bit for
this thing to work out and to be able to
communicate that in such a way that the
people you're speaking to can hear it.
Um because you're adjusting this
emotional um subjective emotional
component to them. That to me is the
secret of great communication.
>> What is an iconic character to you? And
and I asked that because I feel like
most people maybe selfishly want
themselves to be like an iconic
character in their own story, their
company, you know, to be an iconic thing
in the world that it operates. Like you
think about iconic characters, what are
the what things come to mind? My view
today and it might change but has
probably to do with um an ability to be
a Greek hero which means to to to live
and espouse a world view that is
universally disliked. That's iconic. I'm
I'm really interested on this pure
narrative level in what Elon Musk is
doing because it's it is so unconcerned
with the traditional hero trajectory is
almost Greek and and this idea of the
breaking societal rules if you will that
um you get to some platonic ideal right
that is worth more than acceptance. And
I think all all stories have in common
the idea of of resilience, right? That
this that a character will overcome
these obstacles and things are not
working and there's enough knowledge and
enough power to go where one must go or
one has impelled or has been impelled to
go and keep going anyways. Right? So
this idea of resilience and and to keep
going anyways even though the obstacles
are getting enormous, I think inspires
that begrudging admiration. None of this
is a moral evaluation and no one cares
what I think what what's good or bad on
a on a sort of personal moral level but
on a narrative level I think it's
absolutely fascinating that you have
someone willing to step out on such
limbs all the time
>> is that also just fighting death
>> everything is in some ways a death
project right yeah absolutely who who
feels that creativity the art of
creating negates death and therefore is
the the the the purest
expression of a battle against the
inevitable able and Tolken has this
famous clip on YouTube that think all
stories are about death and I think he's
absolutely right because it's the
ultimate stakes uh and it's the stakes
everyone lives with every day and we get
up and do things anyways
>> go deeper on that so we all have to die
and therefore a certain kind of story is
appealing
>> well I think it has to do with um a
perceived power differential right that
we're completely powerless in the face
of death at least for now and that is a
fantasy to require more power and then
because we have this capacity to imagine
the future. Um, and we can imagine
really much anything. Um, we have an
ability to create our own cherished
outcome. They're overcoming this this
weakness with the power fantasy. Right?
So, um, Robert Town, who was a great
screenwriter and wrote um, Chinatown and
he recently died, but a wonderful life
and a wonderful career. He said this to
me at lunch years ago when I was a young
executive. He said, "Stories are either
um desires fulfilled or anxieties
purged." I think he's right.
>> You know, these are great minds who've
made great films. It's never left me. I
think I think it has to do with
overcoming the basic human condition.
>> I want you to expand on each of those
two. Anxiety purged or fantasy
fulfilled. That these are the two
fundamental kinds of stories. Um is it
important that people know which one
they're in?
>> We experience both desire and fear,
right? It's not just one or the other.
The hero's journey is very often a
desire to rise in the world. It's a
desire to to fulfill one's potential in
the world. An anxiety or a fear purged
is an idea of a an inherent fear of
something that might happen to you that
you really don't wish to happen. And it
feels good to see a version of the world
play out where that which you're afraid
of actually doesn't happen because you
have had agency in defeating it. This is
always really important. So story is
character and action, right? Things
don't happen to you. It's you act
against obstacles and as you do require
knowledge and with knowledge comes power
to then effect the outcome. It's also
interesting to say uh to see that this
is never done alone, right? So, so you
they're always surrogates,
people who give you knowledge and people
who aid you in the quest. Um, whatever
the quest may be.
>> As you begin to process for what makes a
great story, making them enjoying them,
what elements started to fall out.
>> I have an unusual maybe view of this
because I don't always think think it
needs to be enjoyable. Um I think that's
a recent meaning in the last 30 40 years
uh phenomenon where where storytelling
became entertainment almost exclusively
and and I I don't think that's the the
genealogy of that space at all. I also
think story is has a religious aspect
not in the organized
uh way necessarily but perhaps in a the
way of of of um ultimate concern.
>> Maybe the most common ultimate concern
probably by revealed preference uh in
the US in the group of people listening
to this is money.
>> Yeah.
>> What do you think about that?
>> It's an unbelievably powerful symbol
because it has its stores potentiality.
>> So the mind can imagine anything. So
it's the ultimate story in some sense
outside of the greatest story ever told
where both all your desires and
fantasies can be fulfilled and all your
anxieties can be purged to such a degree
maybe that the money project is is a is
a denial of death project. The more you
acrew of that because it it allows
itself to
be imprinted with any any vision that
you want. The more you acrewue of it,
the the more it gives the illusion that
you're not going to have to,
you know, leave your consciousness.
>> What is a great story to you? What does
that mean?
>> I think it's a character starting at an
extreme point, going to an extreme point
that they cannot imagine at the
beginning, but consciously imagine at
the beginning, but somehow deep down
know that this is where they need to go.
Um, and then situations arranged in such
a way that the original intent faces
bigger and bigger versions of a barrier
that is then resolved at the very end to
some degree. Most characters that you
meet are either underdogs trying to rise
or kings who are falling or queens are
falling. Right? The biggest people in
the world believe they're the underdog.
Right? Because we are again locked into
this subjective experience of the world
and we are wanting beings. Why is that
such an appealing story? Like why is the
underdog that succeeds so universally
enjoyable?
>> Because everyone views themselves as
one,
>> right? So So it's this it's this you get
access to people when they recognize
themselves in what it is you're saying.
the human desire to overcome
our wretched state, which is there's
this kickot
uh phrase I always love and and it's
that humans are gods who
I think I think it has to do with this
capable
being on this planet that has to die,
right? So, so in that sense, all these
things are questions of death. love me
to evaluate my distillation of great
story and like ask you what's missing in
in the elements that as I've thought you
were I know you were coming to see me so
I was thinking about this a lot and I
was trying to give myself only three you
know three common traits or something
just to keep it simple and the things I
came up with were originality which we
talked a little bit about in terms of
dominant worldview versus how you think
the world should be hardship and
ultimately transformation information as
I think about my favorite stories or if
I think about the own best versions of
my story that I've lived because I know
it intimately those three elements have
been present andor dominant in what I
view as great stories.
Where do you agree and disagree with
those elements? I'm curious. hardship as
the barrier um
to be overcome is the foundational
element of any narrative. I find it very
interesting in general that when you
look at the history of storytelling how
the the the archetype or the if you will
the paradigm of what a story is is
someone actively overcoming obstacles to
achieve something. So I guess some
somehow this must correspond to
how
collectively
you see this in Chinese mythology you
see it in Indian mythology you you
overcome
through activity but through intentional
action big or small doesn't doesn't mean
and it can just be very very small there
you bergman is full of interiority
there's almost no external action So
most of these by the way are internal
barriers as well as external barriers.
So so I think that's probably the
is a foundational piece the the
overcoming of obstacles and the which
then becomes in and of itself the reason
for doing it right there is no journey
to go on without an obstacle. So in that
sense I think it's essential
originality.
I I have this specific view in um
because I think very often successful
people will I just heard a um an
interview with a with a brilliant
designer uh and he talked about
originality and how it's so important
and and and it felt like a status game
that people play that when when they do
something great that somehow it was
entirely original so as to grandise
their their achievement. And it's
entirely possible that they felt that
this was the case. I think very often
it's it's much more derivative. And I
think we should be much kinder to the
notion of derivative. And I think we
should
understand perhaps that originality is
is it's just another form of derivation.
Uh except it's one that perhaps hasn't
been done quite in this way before.
Everything's been said, right?
everything we've just said on this
conversation in this conversation has
been said before in some way by someone
at some point um it just wasn't maybe
heard uh or it wasn't said in the right
way that one specific person could hear
it. I think originality is in the same
in the same way.
>> Maybe to redefine originality then maybe
originality is the wrong word and
instead it's like a novel revelation of
some constant truth or something like
that like a new way to show people uh an
old thing. And and so what about
transformation?
>> Transformation is interesting because in
the Greek poetic sense it it it would be
a transformation. It would be the
emergence of a new of new insight, a new
power which then creates a new kind of
version of yourself or of the of the
hero self. And then and then um lately
I've also added maybe in my mind this
this idea of uh of transcendental
insight as enough. You know, um, James
Joyce was all about this, the joysian
epiphany, the moment where the character
accesses a universal truth, a
transcendental truth about the world
just for a brief moment. Uh, and and and
that's the end of it. So even just the
recognition, oh, this is how the way
things really are, maybe that's enough,
too.
>> What have you learned about status and
the role that status plays in human
behavior? And um, yeah, just more
broadly, I know this is a topic that
you've thought a lot about. teach us
about status a bit.
>> I think everything is about status and
and um every scene is about status and
uh every scene is about a power
differential is what we find
relentlessly fascinating. Every
interaction
is is um about status. There's a story
about British actor who who knew
absolutely everyone in English society
and for some reason was unsuccessful at
getting what they wanted. And he said
when he overplayed his status he would
be hated. When he underplayed his status
he wouldn't get what he wanted. Everyone
liked him but he wouldn't get what he
wanted. When he matched status he will
get whatever he asked for.
>> How do you define it? What is it?
>> It's a sense of accepted superiority
visa v another whether it's physical
uh um societal or moral. What about just
on the on like the very basic level of
like the thing you're doing and why
>> I'm building a film studio from scratch?
>> Yeah.
>> With um Mitch Lask as my chairman and
and A16Z as my um investor including
including Mitch u and Mitch Laskkey is a
former partner at Benchmark and comes
from the video game world and and Mark
and Mark and is obviously a great lover
of cinema and has seen absolutely
everything. The quest is twofold. Trying
to make
movies in a very traditional sense that
at least for me personally have an
aspiration towards some kind of epiphany
or some kind of transcendental insight
even if it's very brief or maybe show
some kind of transformation possible
around these philosophical principles.
And then there are two sort of technical
components to it. One one being is in
how we make things. And again I I very
much believe that that um the the nature
of artistic expression is in the human
intent but technology can help in film
making is inherently a technological
endeavor because you're representing the
world via uh cameras right it's not a
you're staging events to make them look
as if they were real but they're
obviously not. So in that sense it's
technologically mediated and always has
been. And then the third endeavor was is
going to be around distribution but
marginally and and We're all three very
interested in in whether something can
be done on the edges that espouses this
8020 philosophy of well it's going to be
very much a movie company. It is very
much a movie company um but but maybe
has a couple of points in the dominant
worldview that it perhaps doesn't quite
believe
>> uh and wants to substitute something
else for it.
>> What have you learned from each of those
guys? Both very
>> endless talented and absolutely endless
both founders. They're both amazingly
successful investors. They've done the
whole thing. They've done it numerous
times and and they're very patient and
and and generous, at least at at this
stage of the of the game. Um, they both
have a a real understanding and passion
for the the craft and artistic nature of
of um of storytelling. courage, complete
comfort with calculated failure. As in,
if you know what you're doing, you're
trying something, and you know it's a
trial balloon, it's totally all right if
it goes wrong as long as you really
thought about it. And there's a
calculated risk as opposed to a random
let's see what sticks kind of risk.
Really incredible ability to map out
sort of in an imaginary way what could
be. Always allowing that you're not
seeing something, but really mapping it
out. never sort of in a sense where it's
it's this or that. It's always it could
be all these kinds of things and based
on past experience this has really
worked right and then sort of branching
off of that most I think risk tolerance
like it's it's I guess maybe it's a
blessing of success right that you just
increasingly become tolerant like a sort
of calculated risk
um which in the in the creative endeavor
is a requirement because you're going to
fail
>> do you think we take enough risk in
general as people
>> no not on a personal emotional level not
on a professional level. Even just being
around people who who have a more
benevolent attitude towards failure can
be extremely helpful. Um because one's
own worth is not caught up in in um
whether something works or not. Like
this is also a huge advantage that the
Americans have over the Europeans
um where where failure in Europe is so
shameful. have tons of reasons for ideas
for why this might be and and then
America is more forgiving obviously on
the margins and sometimes you think oh
wow this is a level of heatlessness that
perhaps is a little irresponsible but
yeah I think risk goes is inherent sort
of the end stage of this kind of
transformation that you talk about right
when you have figured out your ultimate
concern you figured out that they're
going to be barriers you can kind of
name the barriers even um you gain
self-nowledge you realize that through
action
there's power even just in the action
itself even though it doesn't actually
yield anything immediately. Um and then
action begets action which begets
courage.
>> I' I'd love to sort of redo an exercise
that you've done on me before because I
think it's uh translatable for everyone
listening. You asked me some question
which was something something that
rhymed with um what is the what is the
version of your story that is so big
that it terrifies you? Can you unpack
that very powerful question?
>> The mind obviously is very good at
projecting um into the future and can
imagine really
really anything. What is possible
even emanating from our own subconscious
is so much bigger than what the the left
hemisphere brain the rational um
analytical brain can handle. Uh um so I
think there is a
there's a fear of the of the bigness of
the world and that that fear of the
bigness of the world is also reflected
in the inner world. You know so much of
story is is actually an an inner
transformation. Um so when when you have
infinite potential in the outer world
this potential is probably also inside
of you and it's overwhelming. So fear is
present but it it's it's a fear of
potential. uh um of of all that could
be.
>> Do you think fearing greatness is like
the ultimate fear?
>> I think fearing greatness as long as we
define greatness as a manifold um uh of
flourishing of of of life. Um so in all
its forms, right? Not just a a great
engineer or a great company builder. If
we believe as I do that that
storytelling especially through the
course of you know from Gilgamesh all
the way to now is thousands of years of
storytelling and mythmaking that we we
have thoroughly enjoyed people realizing
potential in the world right that there
is an inner drive um to to reach one's
potential there's probably a a fear of
of reaching one's own potential
um because it might be too big
>> what about inner confict like
uh a character who wants two opposing
things at the same time.
>> Well, that's the definition of story,
right? So great, this is a Faulner
quote, but great conflict is the heart
and conflict with itself. That's a great
story. So you want two conflicting
things at the same time. You're afraid
and you have you're very invested in
your fear and you want you know you you
create situations in the original state
where you um this investment in your
fear pays off and and at the same time
there's a there's a part of you mostly
subconscious can be conscious that
there's a dream of you know greatness if
you will and those are absolutely in
conflict because the fear wants to
dominate and the the greatness wants to
uh come out and and and do its thing and
it's it's through the story itself that
this gets worked out and I always think
this you know the when when someone
takes on the position of a leader and
how relieved everyone else is not to
have to do that people love to just
disappear and amass right and be
relieved of the burden of individuality
but this is possible because someone has
a will to power and steps up and says I
will do it
>> why do you think that is should more
people want should we should we all be
leaders in some way
>> in some I think emphasis in some way I
think we have a very narrow definition
of leader is business or political
leader and then that's sort of the end
of it. Um I think actually if you invert
that and you just simply say you have a
predicate understanding of yourself at
that point in time based on reflection
and you act according to this predicate
understanding as best as you can at that
point in time you're already a leader
right simply because you're you're
guided by
a philosophical worldview that feels
absolutely true to you at that moment.
back to this exercise of a version of a
story that's so big it terrifies you.
Sounds like the model is the the just
raw potential is so big but the mind
can't figure it out. And so the process
is figuring out how to get something
that's like subconscious out like like
let it free. H how do how does one do
that?
>> Character and action
through action. Right? This is the great
discovery of the pragmatists which I
think is a huge reason for why the
American experiment has been so
successful is that people do a lot of
doing happening. You know, you cannot
have a good narrative without an active
character. Uh there's no one that sits
around and thinks their way through
problems. I think it's a combination of
having a dominant worldview to fight
against, of having a personal worldview
to a spouse, all of which can change. um
probably won't change all that much, but
it can um and a willingness to those
voices that perhaps are in the
subconscious
safely come to the surface uh and see
where it goes without having an out a
specific outcome in mind. Narrative is
fear made conscious
and conquer through action. If I go back
to the beginning and take everything
we've talked about and and ask you again
to give a sort of like grand unified
theory of everything that you've been
searching for, what's your best attempt
at that?
>> Is it it's a technology that is able to
through consilience so through pulling
from all strands of knowledge to
communicate an ultimate concern. So an
absolute truth in the story universe
in such a subjective way in such a way
that the individual can understand it on
an emotional personal level which is
kind of also what philosophy has been
trying to do and it's also what religion
has been trying to do. So in that sense
it's um it's a technology layer of
arranging situations and character in
such a way that enables this
transmission. storytelling is sutical
uh and has a form of salvation not the
form of salvation a form of salvation
maybe the answer to the question am I
worthy of love the answer is yes it very
often comes back to that on the
emotional level
um uh and then very often is it safe to
die and the answer is in most cases yes
>> wise answer both to yes
>> because it's better than the alternative
>> you mentioned um a guy named Don
Rosenthal to me one time.
>> Yes.
>> What did he teach you and how did he
teach it to you?
>> That it's safe to die and that you're
worthy of love.
>> So, how how did he teach it to you?
>> By saying that in in the end, every
story is is a metaphor, right? So, you
so you want to couch all all these
absolute truths revealed in a subjective
way in in metaphors that don't spell it
out directly, but convey their meaning
through um something that's close but
not the thing itself.
uh and he he had this wonderful way of
repeating back to you the absurdity of
your beliefs and laughing at them. So
you would be laughing at these absurd
constructs that these stories that
you've come up with and believe to be
fundamentally true mainly because you
hadn't done the work of just saying well
what do you really believe
right and once you once you do that
it's your ultimate concern and it's your
bedrock and you can refer back to that
at any given time usually every you know
five minutes when you have to
communicate and make a decision of some
kind it gives you enormous confidence.
There's another guy that I really like.
This guy John Donahghue talks a lot
about Master Ekart, the the German
mystic who was on the on the edge of of
Christianity because it was really
almost emerging into Buddhism. Uh who
who had this concept of galasenhide
which is the the letting go of all
intent simply experience the divine
nature that's already in you by the pure
fact that you're alive. And once you
realize that all else is an
afterthought, and I think that's
probably what Don Rosenthal um
communicated to me in a visceral way.
>> I'm going to ask my traditional closing
question. What is the kindest thing that
anyone's ever done for you?
>> Um I thought about this.
There's so many people that I owe a lot
to. I know that it's my wife
um who uh married me.
I think that probably is the kindest
thing.
>> Simple as that. Yeah,
>> Wolf Gang, I've uh counted on you for so
many episodes of trying to figure things
out. And
you've pointed out several times today
that each version of this exercise is
deeply personal and you can't abstract
it into some perfect formula to have
everyone find their way. But I hope
we've done uh a decent job of of some
breadcrumbs that people can follow in
pursuit of their own kind of most
interesting version of their story.
Thank you so much for doing this with
me.
>> Thank you. And thank you for your time.
>> Thank you.
[Music]